doc(monitoring): monitoring guide (#3300)
bentoml/BentoML: docs/source/guides/monitoring.rst

============================================
Inference Data Collection & Model Monitoring
============================================

Data-Centric Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a popular paradigm that is
revolutionizing the way we build AI systems. It is a new way of thinking
about AI that is based on the idea that data is the most important
component of AI systems.

BentoML embraces this new paradigm by providing APIs that make a data-centric workflow easy to implement.

.. image:: ../_static/img/batching-architecture.png

> In this guide, we will focus on the online data collection and model monitoring. BentoML provides a unified interface for that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide will focus on online data collection and model monitoring. We will walk through how one can take full advantage of such features with BentoML. 
```

> BentoML embraces this new paradigm by providing APIs that make a data-centric workflow easy to implement.
> 
> .. image:: ../_static/img/batching-architecture.png
> 
> In this guide, we will focus on the online data collection and model monitoring. BentoML provides a unified interface for that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BentoML embraces this new paradigm by providing a unified API for data-centric workflows.

.. image:: ../_static/img/batching-architecture.png
```

> To implement a data collection and model monitoring workflow, you can get these benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefits of having a data collection and model monitoring workflow includes:
```

> - Monitoring key statistical business metrics
> - Identify data drift early to help decide if the model needs to be retrained
> - make QA possible for the previous untracked metrics, like data and model performance
> - use the same data collection and model monitoring workflow for training or model iteration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitor key statistical business metrics.
- Identify early data drift events to determine whether retraining is required.
- Enable QA for the previous untracked metrics, such as model performance, accuracy, degradation, etc.
- Better interoperability for training or model iteration.
```

Build an ML Application with monitoring API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Let's take a simple iris classifier service in bentoml/examples as an example below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following examples are excerpted from :github:`tree/main/examples/quickstart`.
```

> Given that we have the definetion of the bento service:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Given that we have the definetion of the bento service:
> 
> :code:`service.py`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    {"sepal length": 6.4, "sepal width": 3.1, "petal length": 5.5, "petal width": 1.8, "pred": "virginica", "timestamp": "2022-11-09T15:31:26.812188", "request_id": "15915060852312696387"}

Shipping the collected data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BentoML has a general monitoring data collecting API. This makes it possible to ship collected data to anywhere without code changes.
For example to a data warehouse, data analyze pipelines or to a monitoring & drift detection solution.

To achieve this, we just neet to provide a deployment configuration to bentoml.

Built-in Monitoring Data Collectors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Through log files

The most common way to collect monitoring data is to write it to log files. Many utils like fluentbit, filebeat, logstash, etc. can be used to collect log files and ship them to a data warehouse or a monitoring system.
This is also the default way BentoML exports monitoring data:

.. code:: yaml
    :caption: `deployment_configuration.yaml`

    monitoring:

>       enable: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      enabled: true
```

      type: default
      options:
        log_path: path/to/log/file

For Docker deployments, user can mount the log directory to a volume to persist the log files.
For K8s deployments, user can mount the log directory, and deploy a fluentbit daemonset or sidecar container to collect the log files to target destinations.

2. Through a OTLP endpoint

.. code:: yaml
    :caption: `deployment_configuration.yaml`
    monitoring:
      enable: true
      type: otlp
      options:
        endpoint: http://localhost:5000
        insecure: true
        credentials: null
        headers: null
        timeout: 10
        compression: null
        meta_sample_rate: 1.0,

For some deployment platforms, it's not easy to collect log files. For example, AWS Lambda doesn't support log files. In this case, BentoML can export monitoring data to an OTLP endpoint.
Some log collectors like fluentbit also supports OTLP input.

Plugins and Third-party Monitoring Data Collectors
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> BentoML also supports plugins and third-party monitoring data collectors. User can write a custom monitoring data collector and publish it as a python package.
> Unlike built-ins are more protocol specific for general use cases,
> plugins could be more platform specific.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BentoML supports plugins and third-party monitoring data collectors. Users can implement a custom monitoring data collector.

.. note::

	Currently, in order to use your custom monitoring data collectors, the implementation must be exported as a `Pip package`. See `Python packaging <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/packaging-projects/>`_ for more information on publishing a Python package.
 
Unlike builtins that are protocol-specific for general use cases,
plugins can be implemented to be platform-specific.
```

.. note::

>     To use plugins, you need to install the plugin and include it in the dependencies section of the bentofile.
>     For example, it is required to add `bentoml-plugins-arize` to the `python:packages` to use the Arize plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To use plugins, the plugins need to be enlisted as a dependency under the :ref:`bentofile.yaml <guides/bento:The Build Command>`.

    .. code-block:: yaml
    
    	python:
    	  packages:
    	    - my_monitoring_plugins
```

> 1. Ship to Arize AI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Arize AI
```

> For end-to-end solutions for data/model monitoring, BentoML colaborates with Arize AI to provide a plugin for Arize.
> If you don't want to deploy a pipeline by yourself but still need data and model monitoring for the bussiness, Arize AI is a good choice.
> 
> Arize AI provides a unified platform for data scientists, data engineers, and ML engineers to monitor, analyze, and debug ML models in production.
> And the `bentoml-plugins-arize` makes it easy to work with BentoML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our joint collaboration with `Arize AI <https://arize.com/>`_ offers users an easy-to-use end-to-end deployment (BentoML) to model monitoring (Arize) solution.

Arize AI provides a unified platform for data scientists, data engineers, and ML engineers to monitor, analyze, and debug ML models in production.

BentoML provides a ``bentoml-plugins-arize`` to integrate Arize to BentoML as a plugin.

.. seealso::

	:docs:`integrations/arize` for our integrations with Arize.

.. seealso::

	`Arize Python SDK <https://docs.arize.com/arize/data-ingestion/api-reference/python-sdk/arize.init#keyword-arguments>`_ and `sending real-time logs to Arize <ttps://docs.arize.com/arize/sending-data-to-arize/data-ingestion-methods/sdk-reference/python-sdk/arize.log>`_ for available keyword arguments under ``monitoring.options``.
```

.. code:: yaml
    :caption: `deployment_configuration.yaml`

    monitoring:
        enable: true
        type: bentoml_plugins.arize.ArizeMonitor
        options:
            space_key: <your_space_key>
            api_key: <your_api_key>

>             # ... more arize options
>             # see https://docs.arize.com/arize/data-ingestion/api-reference/python-sdk/arize.init#keyword-arguments
>             # and https://docs.arize.com/arize/sending-data-to-arize/data-ingestion-methods/sdk-reference/python-sdk/arize.log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> You could also join the BentoML community and develop your own monitoring data collector by implementing the `bentoml.monitoring.MonitorBase` interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::

	To implement your own monitoring data collector, See `bentoml.monitoring.MonitorBase <https://github.com/bentoml/BentoML/blob/d53667da6bedf503e28701d2f0d1c700a5596f64/src/bentoml/_internal/monitoring/api.py>`_ interface.
	
	You can also submit a PR at :github:`bentoml/plugins` to include your monitoring plugin integration to the BentoML ecosystem.
```

Author: I'd like to reserve the call of action to join ths community

revolutionizing the way we build AI systems. It is a new way of thinking
about AI that is based on the idea that data is the most important
component of AI systems.

BentoML embraces this new paradigm by providing APIs that make a data-centric workflow easy to implement.

.. image:: ../_static/img/monitoring_workflow.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

In this guide, we will focus on the online data collection and model monitoring. BentoML provides a unified interface for that.

The benefits of having a data collection and model monitoring workflow includes:
- Monitoring key statistical business metrics
- Identify data drift early to help decide if the model needs to be retrained
- make QA possible for the previous untracked metrics, like data and model performance
- use the same data collection and model monitoring workflow for training or model iteration

Build an ML Application with monitoring API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following examples are excerpted from :github:`bentoml/BentoML/tree/main/examples/quickstart`.

Given that we have the definetion of the bento service:

:code:`service.py`

> .. code:: python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. code-block:: python
```

    :caption: `service.py`

    import numpy as np
    import bentoml
    from bentoml.io import Text
    from bentoml.io import NumpyNdarray

    CLASS_NAMES = ["setosa", "versicolor", "virginica"]

    iris_clf_runner = bentoml.sklearn.get("iris_clf:latest").to_runner()

    svc = bentoml.Service("iris_classifier", runners=[iris_clf_runner])

    @svc.api(
        input=NumpyNdarray.from_sample(np.array([4.9, 3.0, 1.4, 0.2], dtype=np.double)),
        output=Text(),
    )
    async def classify(features: np.ndarray) -> str:
        results = await iris_clf_runner.predict.async_run([features])
        result = results[0]
        category = CLASS_NAMES[result]
        return category

Before we go to the production, we will only need one more step to add monitoring:

> .. code:: python

Author: ```suggestion
.. codeblock:: python
```

============================================
Inference Data Collection & Model Monitoring
============================================

> Data-Centric Artificial Intelligence is a popular paradigm that is
> revolutionizing the way we build AI systems. It is a new way of thinking
> about AI that is based on the idea that data is the most important
> component of AI systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data-centric artificial intelligence is a type of AI that uses data to train and improve its performance. The goal of data-centric AI is to enable machines to process and analyze data in a way that is similar to how humans think and make decisions, allowing them to perform tasks more efficiently and accurately.
```

BentoML embraces this new paradigm by providing APIs that make a data-centric workflow easy to implement.

.. image:: ../_static/img/monitoring_workflow.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

In this guide, we will focus on the online data collection and model monitoring. BentoML provides a unified interface for that.

The benefits of having a data collection and model monitoring workflow includes:
- Monitoring key statistical business metrics
- Identify data drift early to help decide if the model needs to be retrained
- make QA possible for the previous untracked metrics, like data and model performance
- use the same data collection and model monitoring workflow for training or model iteration

Build an ML Application with monitoring API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following examples are excerpted from :github:`bentoml/BentoML/tree/main/examples/quickstart`.

> Given that we have the definetion of the bento service:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the following service definition:
```

:code:`service.py`

> .. code:: python
>     :caption: `service.py`
> 
>     import numpy as np
>     import bentoml
>     from bentoml.io import Text
>     from bentoml.io import NumpyNdarray
> 
>     CLASS_NAMES = ["setosa", "versicolor", "virginica"]
> 
>     iris_clf_runner = bentoml.sklearn.get("iris_clf:latest").to_runner()
> 
>     svc = bentoml.Service("iris_classifier", runners=[iris_clf_runner])
> 
>     @svc.api(
>         input=NumpyNdarray.from_sample(np.array([4.9, 3.0, 1.4, 0.2], dtype=np.double)),
>         output=Text(),
>     )
>     async def classify(features: np.ndarray) -> str:
>         results = await iris_clf_runner.predict.async_run([features])
>         result = results[0]
>         category = CLASS_NAMES[result]
>         return category
> 
> Before we go to the production, we will only need one more step to add monitoring:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

============================================
Inference Data Collection & Model Monitoring
============================================

> Data-Centric Artificial Intelligence is a popular paradigm that is
> revolutionizing the way we build AI systems. It is a new way of thinking

Author: ```suggestion
Data-Centric Artificial Intelligence is an industrial leading paradigm that puts
data at the forefront of AI systems. It is a new way of thinking
```

    @svc.api(
        input=NumpyNdarray.from_sample(np.array([4.9, 3.0, 1.4, 0.2], dtype=np.double)),
        output=Text(),
    )
    async def classify(features: np.ndarray) -> str:
        with bentoml.monitor("iris_classifier_prediction") as mon:
            mon.log(features[0], name="sepal length", role="feature", data_type="numerical")
            mon.log(features[1], name="sepal width", role="feature", data_type="numerical")
            mon.log(features[2], name="petal length", role="feature", data_type="numerical")
            mon.log(features[3], name="petal width", role="feature", data_type="numerical")

            results = await iris_clf_runner.predict.async_run([features])
            result = results[0]
            category = CLASS_NAMES[result]

            mon.log(category, name="pred", role="prediction", data_type="categorical")
        return category

The Monitor object has a ``log()`` API that allows users to log request features and prediction information. Given data type can be one of the following: ``["numerical", "categorical", "numerical_sequence"]`` with each role to be one of ``["feature", "prediction", "target"]``.

> Then we can continue the normal steps, build a bento (BentoML Application) for the above service.

Reviewer 2: With a complete the service definition, we can proceed to build the bento.

> Then we can continue the normal steps, build a bento (BentoML Application) for the above service.

Author: ```suggestion
With a complete service definition, we can proceed to build the bento.
```
